Artificial intelligence (AI) is widely applied in cancer field nowadays. The aim of this study is to explore the hotspots and trends of AI in cancer research. The retrieval term includes four topic words (“tumor,” “cancer,” “carcinoma,” and “artificial intelligence”), which were searched in the database of Web of Science from January 1983 to December 2022. Then, we documented and processed all data, including the country, continent, Journal Impact Factor, and so on using the bibliometric software. A total of 6,920 papers were collected and analyzed. We presented the annual publications and citations, most productive countries/regions, most influential scholars, the collaborations of journals and institutions, and research focus and hotspots in AI-based cancer research. This study systematically summarizes the current research overview of AI in cancer research so as to lay the foundation for future research.

1. Introduction
The concept of artificial intelligence (AI) was first proposed in 1956, which referred to the ability of machines to perform tasks that normally require human intelligence (1). As decades passed by, AI has already reshaped people’s life, especially in image recognition, speech recognition, and autonomous driving. Cancer remains one of the major challenges, and scientists turn to AI to conquer cancers in recent years. AI has shown great potential in various fields of cancer research and treatment. In the area of cancer diagnosis, it exhibits great diagnostic capacity, sometimes even comparable to human experts (2, 3). Currently, it is paving its path toward predict gene mutation models and charactering the tumor microenvironment (4, 5). The success of AI also extends to drugs design and efficacy predictions, which enormously decrease research costs and time burden (6, 7). As in patient prognosis and the response to therapy, the use of AI in this area gradually develops into a hotspot and attracts great attention

Bibliometric analysis is a scientific method that uses statistical methods and mapping approaches to analyze patterns and trends in academic publications, which helps researchers quickly grasp research hotspots and trends in specific areas (9). In recent years, the publications of AI research in cancer have exponentially increased. It is of great significance to fully analyze and organize these literatures to present the research trends in this field. However, bibliometric analysis on the relationship between AI and cancer is still rare. Therefore, the aim of our study is to reveal the hotspots and trends of AI and tumor research so as to lay the foundation for future research.

In this study, we provided a global overview of tumor research in the field of AI from Web of Science (WOS). We performed a bibliometric analysis of publication and citation including annual growth, most productive countries/regions, most contributing authors, journals, and institutions. The worldwide co-authorship network and key contributors were analyzed by software. In addition, we identified the research focus and hotspots in AI-based tumor research.

2. Material and methods
2.1. Data extraction
The retrieval terms, namely, TS = tumor OR TS = cancer OR TS = carcinoma, AND AI, were searched in the Web of Science (WOS) core collection database from January 1983 to December 2022. All documents, including journal title, authors, abstract, published date, journal name, and so forth, were downloaded. The journal impact factor (IF) in the final records was obtained by manual processing in accordance with Journal Citation Reports (Clarivate Analytics, 2021).

2.2. Data collation
We documented and processed all data, namely, the country, continent, and Journal IF for each publication, using Microsoft Excel 2022. The country source was determined by the corresponding author’s address. For our study, we defined multiple countries cooperation (MCP) as any research with authors from different countries, and single country cooperation (SCP) as any research with author(s) from one country. The H-index, which is a quantitative metric that analyzes publication data by considering both the number of publications and their corresponding citations (10), of the author was obtained from the WOS database.

2.3. Statistical analysis
We analyzed the collated information using various visual analysis software tools. VOSviewer (version 1.6.19) and SCImago Graphica (version Beta 1.0.27) were used to visualize worldwide co-authorship. RStudio, based on R packages (biblimetrix, ggplot2, VennDiagram, and ggalluvial), was utilized to analyze publications from different countries, journals, and authors. To analyze keyword clusters, CiteSpace (version 6.1.R6) was used. Price’s Law (11) was used to select the number of core authors, and comprehensive index (Z index) (12) was calculated to identify chief pioneers based on author publication and citations. IF was considered to evaluate the quality of publications. For data analysis and correlation analysis, we used SPSS statistics software (version 26.0) and considered P < 0.05 as statistically significant.

3. Results

3.1. Global overview of tumor research in the field of artificial intelligence
A total of 6,920 papers were collected, with the earliest paper dating back to 1983, as of the end of 2022. The number of publications has been gradually increased (Figure 1A). While the citations have shown an increasing trend until 2020 and have been decreasing thereafter, the journal IF has been steadily rising (Figure 1B). Furthermore, there is a significant correlation between IF and citations (P < 0.001, Figure 1C). Those suggest that AI-based tumor research has attracted much attention to improve the medical care.
Based on co-authorship, seven clusters of worldwide publications were identified (see Figure 1D). Cluster 1, led by China (n = 1,434), India (n = 457), and South Korea (n = 328), was primarily located in Asia. Cluster 2 included various European countries, such as the UK (n = 591), Germany (n = 578), and Greece (n = 99). Cluster 3 included Spain (n = 234) and several African countries. Notably, the USA had the largest number (n = 1,878) globally and was the leading country in Cluster 6. The leading country in Clusters 4, 5, and 7 was Austria (n = 117), Japan (n = 458), and France (n = 312), respectively.

3.2. The analysis and correlation of top countries and journals in AI-based tumor research
To further identify the leading countries, the 6,920 papers were classified into SCP and MCP based on the corresponding authors’ addresses. The top 10 countries with the highest sum of publications and journal IF were selected and presented in Figure 2A. The results showed that the USA (n = 1,363, IF = 10,233.81) and China (n = 1,269, IF = 7,035.71) had highest number of publications and IF, with China having the highest number of SCP (n = 1,014). The publication numbers of other countries in the top 10 ranged from 174 to 354. Interestingly, Japan, South Korea, and India had the highest ratio of SCP to MCP, while the UK had the lowest ratio. Additionally, the IF sum of India (IF = 881.02) was lowest despite its high publication number, while the UK (IF = 2,818.54) ranked third in terms of journal IF. Those suggest that certain countries, such as the USA and China, have emerged as leaders in AI-based tumor research. On the other hand, some countries, such as Japan and South Korea, appear to conduct more independent research and development, while others, such as the UK, seem to collaborate more with other countries and publish higher quality papers.
According to the Z index for each author, 12 leading researchers were identified in each cluster (Figure 3B). Since 2017, many of these influential authors have been publishing AI-based tumor research papers and their publication output has gradually increased. These leading researchers include Professor Tada, Professor Mori, Professor Brinker, Professor Tian, Professor Sharma, Professor Hamamoto, and Professor Madabhushi. In terms of publication quality, Professor Ock, Professor Aerts, and Professor Denniston have published high-quality papers with a journal IF of more than 500. For evaluating the author’s influence, Professors Aerts and Tian were recognized as highly cited researchers based on their H-index.

3.4. Exploration of AI-based popular tumor research
To identify the research focus and hotspots in AI-based tumor research, we conducted a frequency analysis of keywords using VOSviewer and CiteSpace bibliometric software. Keywords with high frequencies were clustered based on the developed techniques, such as “machine learning,” “convolutional neural network,” and “natural language processing,” and tumor research types, such as “breast cancer,” “lung cancer,” and “prostate cancer” ( Supplementary Figures S2A, B ). We then selected the top 10 tumor types according to the number of publications, namely, breast, lung, colorectal, prostate, skin, gastric, cervical, pancreatic, bladder, and esophageal cancer. More details on citation and journal IF were presented in Figure 4A. As expected, the ranking of citation and IF was roughly in line with the publication number. AI-based research on breast and lung cancer had both high-quantity and high-quality publications (Breast: publication: 1,377; citation: 20,622; IF: 9,264.01; Lung: publication: 842, citation: 14,173; IF: 6,443.79). This may be closely related to the global incidence of these types of cancer.
